id: 2a
titolo: Most Authentic
pubblicazine: 2025-06-21
testo:

Last Sunday we were looking for a lampredotto sandwich, exasperated by the closure of all the trusted places, despite being with a Florentine friend we had to head to the central ‘’market’’.

It is a horrid place where you already know what to expect. The tradition is all there. It is a typical place in all respects, typical however not of Florence but of our time. Next to the lampredotto seller, there's certainly no shame in having some Asian cuisine, pizzas, or brioches with pistachios.

However, we are lucky and not because the lampredotto sandwich was less lowly and expensive than we thought. No, the modest surprise was largely offset by having to endure an unbearable rush to find the place. The luck lies in finding yourself in a place so fake that it does not seem believable, leaving no doubts about the nature of the scam. 

Walking through the streets of Florence and looking at the boutiques selling leather items, you are tempted to wonder whether the one you are stopping at is authentic or not. Thus, we run into this confusion, into the effort to distinguish between a true and a false item. This confusion and the accompanying anxiety is the most pervasive feeling of the modern tourist. It's a legitimate confusion but completely useless.

The most significant, corrosive, and deep deception is not in the false, i.e., in the plastic imitation probably produced in Asia, but in the true, in the item actually made from leather by an Italian craftsman. The deception is, exactly, thinking that you are buying a quality item, that will last over time, made with traditional methods. Whether it is actually so, from a material point of view, matters very little. In substance, what you buy is exactly identical to the counterfeit item because, as everyone should know, what you are buying is simply an idea, the emotion of tradition, the secret heart of that place. Asking what this tradition is, is rather useless. In fact, it only exists as a marketing category, i.e., to expand the number of items for sale (but also and increasingly experiences, i.e., the sale of sensations detached from the annoying and backward capitalist technical need to produce an object to which to stick them). The frantic search for objective parameters to measure it (is it real leather, how are the seams, is it being sold to me by a charming old man, is it handmade) only serves two purposes. Firstly, to make the pleasure of the final purchase more intense, to amplify the purchase experience with the search experience (which is predominant in other sectors, such as hunting in second-hand markets). Secondly, to create a class (or marketing) differentiation between those who can afford the more or less counterfeited authentic.

The great beauty of Florence's central market is that allows us to look at our real state. There we no longer have to worry about whether we are facing the fiction of fiction or simple fiction. Everything is clearly built for us. There we may be able to stop using quotation marks for the word tradition because by now its meaning has definitively crossed the previous one, it is no longer ambiguous. 

This certainly generates a lot of irritation. The irritation of finding oneself consuming something expressly made so that we could consume it in that place. The irritation of being objects subjected to marketing and capitalism.

On the one hand, this should not hit us so hard, it's just seeing the world we live in. On the other hand, we feel like fighting back; there are some responses to our condition that seem interesting but risk drowning us in the same ambiguities. I will talk about them soon.