id: 3
titolo: A Perfect Product
pubblication: 2025-01-22
testo:
In the irresistible 'The Pervert's Guide to Ideology,' Zizek speaks of Starbucks' brilliant ploy: a small percentage of every coffee goes to charity. I don't know if it's still the case, but the idea is clear. You're not just enjoying a coffee; you're doing good. \nThe message is: "Yes, our cappuccino is more expensive than others, but we give one percent of all our income to some Guatemalan children to keep them healthy. For the water supply for some Sahara farmers, or to save the forests, to enable organic coffee growing, etc."
And Zizek says:
"In the old days of pure, simple consumerism, you bought a product and then you felt bad. "My God, I'm just a consumerist while people are starving in Africa." So the idea was you had to do something to counteract your pure, destructive consumerism."

DuoLingo has achieved the same mimetic miracle.

The reality to hide is no longer 'I am a consumer' but 'I am a digital dependent.' In the old world - five years ago - no one really felt guilty about using their phone so much. In the new one, yes. The addicting machine has reached such a power that the masses who realize it are no longer negligible. And so a solution must be invented within the system to prevent the system from collapsing.

Creating CandyCrush is no longer enough. Making infinite reels is no longer enough. Creating tropical-colored phones with catchy ringtones and endless notifications is no longer enough. WE ARE OVERWHELMED. 
So: settings to control usage time. Black and white phone.

So: ask anyone why they scroll through Instagram and they will always tell you that they have a feed of interesting things and that they use it to inform themselves. 
Ask an artist, and they will tell you they follow artists. Ask a football fan, and they will tell you they follow transfer market news. Ask an activist, and they will tell you they follow pages that tell what really happens in Gaza. But interrupt someone while they scroll or scroll with them. Of all these contents, there will be a trace, but diluted amongst millions of uselessness. Cats, cars, models in Dubai, plates full of sushi. After all, it's not really our fault. Instagram could be infinitely more useful. Think about how hard it is to find events in a new city. You need to search by name, follow, look through followers. It would be so easy, to search by type and location. But it would be pointless because we would only see what we are really interested in. We could say that interesting content only serves to make us navigate in the muck. But this would be consoling, the reality is much more disturbing: they serve to justify us while we enjoy our swim in the muck, of which we enjoy a lot as long as we have something that distracts us from the fact that we are covered in shit.

So: I do not play CandyCrush, I am certainly not a boomer in the subway, but I want my ten minutes of dopaminergic oblivion damn it. Learn a new language. It doesn't matter if you'll learn it, if you could study better and faster with a little bit of attention. Come here, you will be able to look at a screen with a jumping bird, all colorful and randomly click on never too difficult associations. Enjoy all this because you are improving your life, you are discovering a new culture, you are doing continuous learning. You are not using your phone: you are studying. And you are good: a thousand blue stones in reward.