id: 4
titolo: Overtourism between tiktok and classism
pubblicazione: 2025-02-16
testo:
People are talking more and more about overtourism, or cities full of tourists where the quality of life for residents continues to decline. 

Various forms of protest have emerged: Barcelonians shooting water pistols at unsuspecting vacationing families, more or less threatening stickers on keys lockers, street demonstrations. The first responses? Limiting Airbnb in some cities (as has been done in Paris for some time), removal of lockers in Rome, entry tickets in Venice.

However, as always, protesting does not absolve us from understanding; where all this comes from; what are the realistic alternatives. Here's a useful example.
The Huns of Roccaraso began their invasion after watching a video by a Neapolitan TikToker. Instantly, there was disgruntled outcry. They litter, pollute, and don't spend money. Here the important aspects are: the Huns, TikTok, and spending. 

The first and last are the same. If we go back to the grand tour, the beginning of the transition from travel to tourism. People start traveling to observe, not to do anything else and they travel to familiar places. Wealthy, educated English people go to discover the beauties of Europe. Jumping forward, we can look at the second half of the 20th century. The seaside holiday and mass tourism is born.
The trips are still domestic, as trips abroad are not so easy and are expensive. There are no low-cost airlines, you need a passport, and you're almost forced to stay in a hotel. But, people start to move. A lot of money is spent and there are relatively few travelers.
Then EasyJet, Ryanair, Airbnb and everything explodes. The Huns have arrived. These contemptible beings who don't earn enough to afford to stay in hotels and stay in apartments furnished with low-end furniture (Ikea if they're lucky). Tourist income for cities increases, private income increases. Everyone participates in the game: the low-cost airlines get paid by airports, the airports by cities, property prices rise, restaurants party. 

But there's a catch: more money is coming in, but the average spending per tourist is drastically reduced. At some point, the machine starts to jam. More people also means more problems, more infrastructure to maintain, more crowded streets, public spaces dedicated exclusively to visitors. If these additional people bring less and less money but the same level of annoyance, they become less and less welcome. Roccaraso is the perfect example. People arrive by bus paid in Naples, if you're lucky, they consume a hot chocolate, they don't sleep there, and most people don't know how to ski and therefore won't buy the ski pass. The Huns of Roccaraso become Huns, or barbarians to be pushed back, maybe armed with the water guns that arrived from Barcelona. Behind the nominal reasons (logistical problems, environmental problems, etc.) there’s the true one: they don't spend. That's the problem, the most serious one. The visitor is welcome as long as he spends. It comes right back around. 

In the meantime, TikTok. Thousands of people drawn in just by some videos. In Cinque Terre this summer an American approached me asking 'where's the photo spot?'. I should've known which photo, it was obvious. I distinctly remember him not referring to multiple photos or the famous photo. He had one specific image in mind. Riomaggiore was that image. We were in a somewhat isolated spot - yes there are some there - with local youngsters, the sun was high and the sea stunning. But that wasn't enough, the important thing is finding the photo spot, reconnecting with the idea that brought us here, not connecting with the place. 

Different, far-away areas have never existed as such but have always been mediated by the narrative - remember the grand tour: it was nothing but intellectuals who had an imagination guided by the Greek and Roman classics they had read. However, now this narrative is pervasive, monopolizing and explicit. Starting at the end: places are presented to us with images or reels and therefore perfectly clear, without the nuances left by books, legends or friends' tales. These images are few; even when they are proposed by different sources. There are always the same waterfall shot from the same angle, the same dive, the same plate of carbonara with pistachio grains. 

You could almost imagine an app for the phone that automatically takes a picture when the GPS recognizes that you have arrived at the Instagrammable spot (another time we can delve deeper into how places transform to facilitate this aspect). Finally, the narrative is pervasive, i.e. we are continuously bombarded with thoughts of the same few places being reflected on the same way. TikTok and Instagram are the vehicles of all contemporary fantasies (there's no pornography but there are infinite semi-naked bodies so that's enough). And social networks - today much more than yesterday - don't live off a thousand interactions and a thousand posts, but a million interactions under the photo that happened to go viral. 

So the places to visit are not a thousand, but one. And that place will be overflowing with tourists. Thus, overtourism is the perfect natural reaction to our way of conveying desire. Few places, constantly proposed in a one-sided and reductive manner. Somewhere I read that 90% of tourists visit 10% of the 'attractions' (a word we could already argue about). And you have immediate proof if you follow the trail that winds from the station to San Marco in Venice. If, out of madness, you dare to detach yourself to take a side street, you will find yourself alone within a few meters. 

We have the perfect mix: we are bombarded with content that always shows us the same few wonderful places that we aim to reach simply to take a photo, traveling costs less and less and there are billions of people ready to afford it. Because we are only at the beginning, 300 million Americans are nothing compared to the emerging affluence of 3 billion Chinese and Indians.

Once this is understood we could ban Airbnb, make the TikToking Huns return to their suburban homes and leave the connoisseurs in our hotels with our Routard guide ready for use. Finally. But who gives us the right to do so? After the wealthy Westerners have visited the world are we ready to close it to the poor Westerners, the less than very wealthy non-Westerners? Will we do what we did with the environment that we polluted for two centuries and then preach in the last twenty years about the bad Indians who fill the ocean with plastic?
The temptation is there, because it's easier to find an aesthetically pleasing solution than to admit that perhaps there isn't an ethically sound one. Everyone will want to visit Rome and Venice or that new spot they saw online.
Prevent them from coming, get rid of Airbnb. Prevent them from desiring, take away their social networks. Or create mass education centres to force everyone to promote conscious tourism. You decide, if you can. But these are the terms of the game and there are no solutions that don't smack of an incurable snobbishness.