id: 1a
titolo: Is Life Still Possible?
pubblicazione: 2025-09-02
testo:
It may seem strange but not all shopkeepers are entrepreneurs. In Trieste there is a horse butcher shop that I used to frequent years ago. The butcher (the butcher, not the entrepreneur or the owner, even if they are the same person) is about 70 years old. He has his clientele and I don't think he makes more than €200 a day. I know how many people were going in and it was only open in the morning. The shop was his and he took home what he needed to live well. An economist would quickly understand that from a financial point of view that activity was losing money. The shop was in the center and a 'modern' shop would have paid him rent far more than he could earn in his best month. 
From the economist's point of view, the old butcher was an idiot because he was not exploiting what he had and insisted on working. He was not investing his capital.

Companies - and we - have moved beyond that. We are not only profiting from traditional capital. It is completely normal to include intangible assets in our statements, that goods that a company owns and that help it generate wealth while being intangible. From patents to know-how, to the Coca-Cola logo that allows them to sell the same chemical molecules at a higher price than all the fake cola.

We too, perhaps less consciously, have understood that we can capitalize on intangible assets. "You pay for the view", "It's an experience", "The taste of tradition" don't they suggest the legitimization of this fact?

I'm at the port of Volos. The restaurants are horrifying but the one I’m in endures and produces simple and sublime dishes. The cook hasn't learned the lesson - like the butcher - because it's an inexpensive restaurant - meaning it isn't yet. (the next article will be on this, on the double meaning the word economic has in Italian). One day perhaps he will realise that he is good and therefore he can capitalize on this skill. If he is authentically modern he will not add any precious ingredient to the menu, it will be enough to capitalize on his know-how. Or rather, raise the prices. No one will doubt that this is legitimate. No one doubts it. In fact, the adjective with which my friends and I define this restaurant is absurd. It shouldn't exist as such. The restaurants that exist now are like the one I saw in a Marseille alleyway: bread and oil €4. Simplicity costs.

We can't have the expectation that someone with a good, functioning restaurant, with a capable chef, consciously renounces making more than he currently earns.

We can't expect it and we ourselves are more and more attentive to taking advantage of our opportunities to earn. To make not only our work profitable but also what we own and who we are. Renting out our most classical capital (money in the bank) is a banal example, although ubiquitous - the explosion of platforms for young people's personal finance management in the recent period is proof of this. 

But what are we doing when we rent our room during fashion week? When we sell our clothes on Vinted, bragging to our friends about having sold them for double what we paid? We capitalize pieces of our life.

Doing so makes us not stupid. After being plucked by the restaurant, the used clothing store, the 80-year-old homeowner, won't we be the good Samaritan. Us with our bills, our low wages, our expensive cocktails. 

Opposing this mechanism when choice becomes our daily life and no longer remains in the boards of formidable multinational companies seems impossible because it resembles a completely irrational and quixotic choice. Unless we then find ourselves crushed in the maneuver.

Francesco Ferrero, winner of the first Masterchef, speaks about food on Instagram in a way that I really like. Once he wrote about a small city in Morocco where he ate at a restaurant vegetables brought by himself. He said '*here life is still possible*'.

What contributes to making life impossible at our latitudes (but now more and more south) is that everything has already been given a price and everyone is looking for something on which to display it.

In the old economy what mainly determined this price was the work and the costs of production of a good. Now it is the perceived value. Everything costs as much as we can enjoy. 

I'm in Palermo, haven't been back for ten years. I go to the Capo market, hoping it will be better than the Vucciria, knowing that it is just for tourists now. Even there is no escape. I ask my friend Silvia, who's from Palermo, for guidance. She tells me that now to buy fruits (the markets are now restaurants) there's only some small weekly market or supermarkets. All the stall vendors understood it very well, that their capital of rusty iron stalls was worth nothing but they could sell the tradition by the pound. And people now have to buy the hard, tasteless peaches from the supermarkets.

With this, the air becomes more rarefied and life suffocating because what gets priced (and therefore made scarcer) is exactly the possibility of enjoyment. And every possible value has already been priced.

Sure, life is not just about pleasure but the mechanism does not stop here.

Once everything priceable has been priced, there is only the residue - that which cannot immediately be consumed as desired ("residue is the world" Simone Weil says in Calasso - *The Celestial Hunter* p132 - but that's another story). Residue must therefore be eliminated or standardized to be exploited.

It won't be difficult.

In Piazza Morbegno, Milan, by September 2025 the residue is minimal: a dusty music shop and a hardware store. All the rest are bars, or - worse - wineries with kitchen. I know the hardware store sold the business - to some cocktail bar of course. To sell the business means to sell the rent contract. You pay to take the right to pay rent there. It can be very convenient if the rent is low. How much will it have taken the shopkeepers to swallow the love for their own work?
There you go, life disappears after ingesting all that's residue. Where would I go, if I still lived there, to buy hardware and get advice from an expert? Probably have to take the red line, go further out, perhaps to some giant and impersonal OBI. 

The restaurants at the port are already horrible - money machines to feed frozen products to weary tourists. But they generate revenue and therefore, also here, pay higher rents. One day the owner of our restaurant's walls will decide to raise the rent. Our friend the cook will have to move to the periphery or raise his prices. To do this he will have to ditch the paper tablecloths, the thick glasses and his will be another restaurant like many others. On the Volos promenade, each square meter will be increasingly taken over by less and less cozy tables. Even those who do not necessarily want to enjoy, but maybe eat a good sandwich with friends, will have to flee elsewhere, until they learn to exploit capital even there.