id: 2a
title: Most Authentic
publication: 2025-06-21
text:
Last Sunday we were looking for a Lampredotto sandwich, exasperated by the closure of all our trusted spots, even with a friend from Florence, we had to head to the central ''market''.

A hideous place where you already know what to expect. The ''’tradition’’’ is all there. It's a completely typical place, but not typical of Florence, but of our time. Alongside the lampredottaro, one is certainly not ashamed to place Asian cuisine, pizzas, brioche with pistachios.

However, we are lucky and not because the Lampredotto sandwich was less miserable and expensive than we thought. No, the modest surprise was largely offset by having to embark on an unsustainable race to find the place. The luck lies in being in a place so fake that it does not seem believable, leaving no doubts about the nature of the deception.

Walking through the streets of Florence, and looking at boutiques selling leather items, one is tempted to wonder whether the one we are stopping at is authentic or not. We thus run into that confusion, the struggle of having to distinguish between a real and a fake. This confusion and the accompanying anxiety is the most pervasive feeling of the modern tourist. A legitimate confusion but entirely useless.

The most significant deception, corrosive and deep, is not in the fake, that is, in the plasticky imitation probably produced in Asia, but in the real, in the item actually made of leather by an Italian craftsman. The deception is, precisely, to think that you are buying a quality item, that will last over time, made with traditional methods. Whether it is actually so from a material point of view counts really little. In substance, what you buy is exactly the same as the counterfeit object because, as we should all know, what you are buying is simply an idea, the emotion of tradition, the secret heart of that place. Asking what this tradition is is pretty useless. It is actually there only as a marketing category, that is, to expand the number of items to sell (but also and increasingly 'experiences', that is, the sale of sensations detached from the annoying and old capitalist technical need for production of an object on which to stick them). The frantic searching for objective parameters to measure it (it is real leather, how are the stitches, is it sold to me by a pleasant old man, is it handmade) is only for two things. First of all, to make the pleasure of the final purchase more intense, to amplify the purchase experience with the research experience (predominant in other sectors, such as the hunt for gems in flea markets). Secondly, it creates a class differentiation (or: marketing segments) between those who can afford the more or less counterfeit authentic.

The great beauty of Florence's central market is that it allows us to look at our true state. There, we no longer need to worry about whether we are faced with the fiction of fiction or simple fiction. Everything has clearly been constructed for us. Maybe there we could stop using quotation marks for the word tradition because by now its meaning has definitely surpassed the previous one, it is no longer ambiguous.

This certainly generates a great irritation in us. The irritation of finding oneself consuming something expressly made so that we could consume it in that place. The irritation of being objects undergoing marketing and capitalism.

On the one hand, this should not strike us so much, it is only to see the world in which we live. On the other hand, we feel like fighting it; there are some responses to our condition that seem interesting but risk making us sink into the same ambiguities. I will talk about this soon.