id: 3
title: A perfect product
publication: 2025-01-22
text:
In the irresistible 'Pervert's Guide to Ideology', Zizek talks about the brilliant concept of Starbucks: a small percentage of each coffee is given to charity. I don't know if it is still so, but the idea is clear. You're not just enjoying a coffee, you're doing good. \n The message is: "Yes our cappuccino is more expensive than others but we give one percent of all our income to some Guatemala children to keep them healthy. For the water supply for some Sahara farmers, or to save the forests, to enable organic growing coffee, etc."
And Zizek says:
"In the old days of pure simple consumerism, you bought a product and then you felt bad. \"My God, I'm just a consumerist while people are starving in Africa.\" So the idea was you had to do something to counteract your pure distractive consumerism."

DuoLingo has reached the same mimetic miracle.

The reality to hide is no longer 'I am a consumer' but 'I am a digital addict'. In the old world - five years ago - no one really felt guilty about using the phone so much. In the new one, yes. The addicting machine has reached such a power that the mass that realizes it is no longer negligible. Hence an internal solution must be invented to prevent the system from collapsing.

Creating CandyCrush is not enough anymore. It's not enough to have infinite reels scrolling. It's not enough to create phones with tropical colors, with captivating ringtones and infinite notifications. We are overwhelmed. 
So: settings to control the usage time. Black and white phones.

And so: ask anyone why they scroll Instagram and they will always tell you that they have an interesting feed and they use it to get informed. 
Ask an artist and they will tell you they follow artists. Ask a soccer fan and they will tell you they follow the transfer market news. Ask an activist and they will tell you they follow the pages that tell what really happens in Gaza. But interrupt someone while they're scrolling or scroll with them. Of all these contents, there will be traces, yes, but diluted amidst millions of uselessness. Cats, cars, models in Dubai, plates full of sushi. After all, it's not really our fault. Instagram could be infinitely more useful. Think about how hard it is to find events in a new city. You have to search by name, follow, look among the followers. It would be so easy to search by type and location. But it would be useless, because we would only see what we are really interested in. We could say that interesting content just serves us to navigate through shit. But that would be comforting, the reality is much more disturbing: they serve us to justify ourselves while we enjoy our swim in the shit, which we enjoy a lot as long as we have something distracting us from the fact that we are covered in shit.

And so: I don't play CandyCrush, I'm certainly not a boomer on the metro but I want my ten minutes of dopaminergic oblivion damn it. Learn a new language. It doesn't matter if you will learn it, if you could study better and faster with a bit of attention. Come here, you can watch a screen with a hopping little bird, all colorful and click randomly on never too difficult associations. Enjoy all of this because you are improving your life, you are discovering a new culture, you are continuously learning. You're not using your phone: you're studying. And you're good: a thousand blue stones as a reward.