id: 1a
title: Is life still possible?
publication: 2025-09-02
text:
It may seem strange, but not all shopkeepers are entrepreneurs. In Trieste, there is a horse butcher shop that I used to frequent years ago. The butcher (the butcher, not the entrepreneur or owner, even though they are the same person) is in his seventies. He has his own clientele and I don't think he makes more than 200€ a day. I know how many people used to go in and it was only open in the mornings. He owned the premises and took home what was enough for a comfortable life. An economist would immediately understand that, from a financial perspective, that business was losing money. The shop was in the center and a 'modern' shop would have paid a much higher rent than what he could have made in his best month.
From the economist's perspective, the old butcher was a fool because he didn't take advantage of what he had and insisted on working. He didn't profit from his capital.

Companies - and us - have long moved beyond this. We don't just profit from traditional capital. It is quite normal to include in the balance sheets intangible assets, those "assets" that a company owns and helps it generate wealth even though they are intangible. From patents to know-how, to the Coca Cola logo which allows it to sell the same chemical molecules at a higher price than all the fake colas.

We too, perhaps less consciously, have understood that we can capitalize on intangible assets. "You pay for the view", "It's an experience", "The taste of tradition" do not perhaps suggest the legitimization of this fact?

I'm at the port of Volos. The restaurants are appalling but the one where I am holds out and creates simple and sublime dishes. The cook hasn't learned the lesson - like the butcher - because it is an inexpensive restaurant - or not yet. (the next article will be on this, on the double meaning of the word economic in Italian). One day he might realize that he is good and therefore that he can capitalize on this talent. If he is authentically modern, he will not include any precious ingredient in the menu, it will be enough to capitalize on his know-how. That is, to raise prices. No one will doubt that this is legitimate. No one doubts it. In fact, the adjective with which me and my friends define this restaurant is absurd. It shouldn't exist as it is. The restaurants that exist now are like the one I saw in an alley in Marseille: bread and oil 4€. Simplicity comes at a price.

We cannot expect someone with a good working restaurant, with a capable cook, to voluntarily give up earning more than he is currently making.

We can't expect it and we ourselves are becoming increasingly careful to exploit our earning opportunities. To rent out not only our work but also what we own and what we are. Renting out our most classic capital (money in the bank) is a trivial example, even if ubiquitous - the explosion of personal finance management platforms for young people lately proves it. 

But what are we doing when we rent out our room during fashion week? When we traffic our clothes on Vinted boasting to friends that we sold it for double what we paid for it? We are economizing parts of our lives.

Doing so simply means not being stupid. After all, after the restaurant, the second-hand clothing store, the 80-year-old homeowner have fleeced us, we won't be the good Samaritan. Us with our bills, our low salaries, our expensive cocktails...

Opposing this mechanism when the choice becomes our daily life and doesn't just stay in the boardrooms of frightful multinationals seems impossible because it looks very much like an irrational and quixotic choice. Except that then we find ourselves crushed in the mechanism.

Francesco Ferrero, winner of the first Masterchef, talks about food on Instagram in a way that I really like. Once he wrote about a small town in Morocco where he ate in a restaurant with vegetables he brought himself. He said 'here life is still possible'.

What makes life impossible here (but increasingly so below) is that everything already has a price and everyone is looking for something to put it on.

In the old economy, what determined this price was mainly the work and production costs of a good. Now it is perceived value. Everything costs as much as we can enjoy it.
 
I'm in Palermo, I haven't been back in ten years. I go to the Capo market, hoping it is better than the Vucciria, which I know is now just for tourists. But there is no escape there either. I ask Silvia, my friend from Palermo, for advice. She tells me that to buy fruit (markets are now restaurants), there are a few small weekly markets or supermarkets. All the stall owners have understood very well that their capital of rusty iron stalls was worth nothing, but they could sell tradition for a fortune. And people now have to buy the hard and flavorless peaches from supermarkets.

The air thus becomes more rarefied and life suffocating because what is priced (and thus made scarcer) is exactly the possibility of enjoyment. And every possible value has already been priced.

Of course, life is not only enjoyment but the mechanism does not stop here. 

Priced the priceable, what remains is the residue - what cannot be eaten up as desired ("the residue is the world" says Simone Weil in Calasso - *The celestial hunter* page 132 - but that's another story). The residue must therefore be eliminated or standardized in order to be exploited.

It won't be difficult.

In Piazza Morbegno in Milan the residue in September 2025 is minimal: a dusty music shop and a hardware store. Everything else is bars or - the worst - wine shops with kitchens. I know that the hardware store has sold the business - to a cocktail bar of course. Selling the business means: sell the lease. You pay to take over the right to pay rent there. It can be very convenient if the rent is low. How much would it have cost for the merchants to swallow their love for their own work?
Here it is, life disappearing after the residue has been swallowed up. Where would I go to buy hardware and get advice from an expert if I still lived there? Probably I would have to take the red line, go even further into the suburbs, maybe to some gigantic and impersonal OBI.

The restaurants at the port are already horrible - money machines to feed frozen products to exhausted tourists. But they turnover money and therefore, here too, they pay higher rents. One day the owner of the walls of our restaurant will decide to raise it. Our friend chef can go to the suburbs or raise prices. To do so he will have to throw away the paper tablecloths, the thick glasses and his will be another restaurant like so many. On the Volos seafront, every square meter will be increasingly occupied by less and less inviting tables. Even those who don't necessarily want to enjoy, but maybe eat a good sandwich with friends, will have to flee elsewhere, until they learn to exploit capital there too.